# Lesson 2: Hello world

<!-- 
2. Use the scripting language to build desktop/console applications to automate common tasks.
2.1.Get started with the scripting language. 
2.1.1. How the interpreter works. 
2.1.2. “Hello, World!” in the chosen language.

2.2.Data types. 
2.2.1. Standard data types. 
2.2.2. Numbers and strings. 
2.2.3. Lists, tuples and dictionaries. 
2.2.4. Assignment statements. 
2.2.5. Formatting Strings. 
2.2.6. Introducing libraries.
-->

## Scripts and interpreters
A script is a sequence of instructions handled one at a time by an interpreter. The job of the interpreter is to understand the script instructions and communicate with the underlying Operating System (OS) to request the necessary services. As script developers you do not need to know how your instructions are handled by the OS. Most Python scripts can run on any OS without changing the script at all. When compared to an executable (compiled program), scripts are slower to run since syntax analysis and conversion to binary is done at compilation time. 

## First Python script
The script below is the simplest script you can write in Python. Save it to a .py file and run it.
~~~
print("Welcome to Python.")
~~~

## Variable data types
Variables are used to store different types of data in memory that can be referenced and modified in a script. Variables are given a descriptive name to make scripts more readable. It is helpful to think of variables as containers that hold information. Use ```type()``` to check the types of each of the variables declared.
~~~
age = 30
print(age)
print(type(age))
~~~

### Integers
An integer (int) is a whole number, e.g.: 9. In Python 3, there is practically no limit to how long an integer value can be.
~~~
age = 30
~~~

### Floating-Point Numbers
A floating-point number (float) is a number with a decimal point, e.g.: 33.65
~~~
price = 9.99
~~~

### Booleans
A Boolean (bool) is a data type that may have one of two values, True or False:
~~~
canRunFast = True
canJumpHigh = False
~~~

### Strings
A String (str) is sequences of characters. Strings may be delimited using either single or double quotes. All the characters between the opening delimiter and matching closing delimiter are part of the string.
~~~
aString = 'Here is a string'
anotherString = "Here's another one"
~~~

## Reading user input
For a simple scripts it is sometimes useful to allow a user to enter some input. Strings can be read using  ```input()```.
~~~
name = input('What is your name? ')
~~~

### Converting from string to numbers
Once you have a string from the user you can convert it to a number. Later in this course we will learn to validate user input.
~~~
age_as_string = input('What is your age? ')
age_as_int = int(age_as_string)
~~~

### Task
Write a program that asks the user to enter the following and store them in appropriate variable types:
* The weight of a person
* ID number
* Telephone Number
* Address
* Is Maltese Resident
* Bank Account balance
* The height of a person
* A maltese number plate

## Working with variables
### Mathematical operations
~~~
one = 1
ten = 15 - 5
eleven = one + ten
~~~

Can you guess what the following code will print out?
~~~
number = 10
number += 5
print(number)
~~~

### Combining strings (concatenation)
~~~
createdBy = "Python was created by"
guido = "Guido van Rossum"
sentence = createdBy + " " + guido
~~~

### Formatting output 
It is possible to print a number of variables at one go (separated by a space)
~~~
seven = 7
twoAndHalf = 2.5
hello = "hello"

# This will work!
print(seven, twoAndHalf, hello)

# This will not work!
# print(seven + twoAndHalf + hello)
# TypeError: unsupported operand type(s) for +: 'int' and 'str'

#Fix 
print(str(seven) + str(twoAndHalf) + hello)
~~~

### Advanced output formatting
~~~
print("Integer: %d" % seven)
print("Float: %f" % twoAndHalf)
print("String: %s" % hello)
~~~

Floating point numbers can be rounded before printing 

~~~
print("%d %.2f %s" % (seven, twoAndHalf, hello))
~~~

## Lists and similar structures

### Tuples
Tuples are a list of values e.g. the months of the year, and like other variables they are given a name. It is possible to access the items in a tuple using the index number starting from 0. In months 0=Jan, 1=Feb and so on. What is the output of the following scripts?
~~~
months = ('Jan','Feb','Mar','Apr','May','Jun','Jul','Aug','Sep','Oct','Nov','Dec')
print(months[6]) 
~~~

### Lists
Lists are very similar to tuples, with the only difference being that the entries can be modified. Notice the square brackets instead of normal brackets below:
~~~
toys = ['car', 'doll', 'ball', 'rope']
print(toys)
print (toys[2])
~~~

To add a new toy to our list, use the `append()` function. To remove a toy use the `remove()` function. We will be discussing functions later on in the course...
~~~
toys.append('playstation')
print(toys)
toys.remove('rope')
print(toys)
~~~

### Dictionaries
Dictionaries group a number of keys to their mapped values and are mostly used to hold data that are related. Let's consider a cat named Pixel (who is male, 6kg and ginger):
~~~
pixel = {'name': 'Pixel', 'weight': 6.0, 'color': 'ginger', 'gender': 'M'}
~~~
Curly brackets are used with dictionaries and a colon divides the key from its value. You can access all the dictionary or just one of the values by using its key:
~~~
print(pixel)
print(pixel['color'])
~~~

## Libraries
Python comes with a long list of libraries and more can be added by the user. A libraries can be described as an extension to the language, giving the programmer new features. Let's say you want to print out today's date. You can create a complex script to do so, or you could use a readily-available library. To use any library you need make it accessible by **import**ing it. 
~~~
import datetime
time = datetime.datetime.now()
print(time)
~~~

## References
* https://realpython.com/python-data-types/
* http://sthurlow.com/python/lesson06/
* https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/understanding-data-types-in-python-3
* https://www.codementor.io/sheena/python-path-virtualenv-import-for-beginners-du107r3o1
