<!-- 
2.4.Functions and generators. 
2.4.1. Creating functions. 
2.4.2. Variable scope. 
2.4.3. Nested functions. 
2.4.4. Arguments.

3.3.Functions 
3.3.1. Indirect function calls. 
3.3.2. Anonymous functions. 
3.3.3. Generator functions (if using Python or a supported language).
-->

# Lesson 4: Functions
A function is a few script statements that perform an action. A function is defined and given a name so that it can be reused. Python has a lot of built-in functions that you may be familiar with e.g. **print()** and **input()**. Consider the script below where a function is used to measure the length of a string:
~~~
name = input('Enter your name: ')
length = len(name)
print('Your name is', length, 'characters long')
~~~

## Writing your own functions
A function is defined by using the **def** keyword, followed by the function name and 2 parentheses and ending with a colon. The function body is on the following lines, indented as we did for conditions and loops.
~~~
def drawTriangle():
    print('  *  ')
    print(' *** ')
    print('*****')
~~~
The drawTriangle() function is ready but we are not using it so if we run this script there will be no output. We need to call it outside of the function body as we see below:
~~~
def drawTriangle():
    print('  *  ')
    print(' *** ')
    print('*****')

print("Welcome to my drawing script, below is a triangle")
drawTriangle()
~~~
### Tasks
1. Add a loop to the sample above to call drawTriangle() five times
1. Write a function called **vowelsFilter()** that asks the user to enter their full name and prints out only the consonants.

## Functions with parameters
We can give values (parameters) to the functions when we call them. Parameter names are written within their parentheses on the function definition line. Consider the following function that accepts 2 integer parameters and prints out the largest of the two:
~~~
def largest(num1, num2):
    if num1 > num2:
        print(num1)
    else:
        print(num2)

largest(12, 34)
~~~
### Tasks
1. Write a function superCalc(n1, n2) that takes 2 integers and prints out the following:
   * n1 + n2
   * n1 - n2
   * n1 * n2
   * n1 / n2
1. Ask the users to input 2 numbers and pass them to superCalc() as parameters

## Return values
Normally a function produces a value and this can be returned to the line that called the function. Return statements are used to exit the function by returning a value. Consider the following function that takes 2 strings as parameters, joins them and returns the result
~~~
def join(s1, s2):
    newString = s1 + s2
    return newString

result = join("rock", "star")
print(result)
~~~
Functions exit immediately when a return statement is executed, even if there is no return value. In such case None is returned
~~~
def testNumber(num):
    if num < 0:
        return 0
    
    return num * num * 2

def otherTest(num):
    if  num < 0:
        return
   
    print(num, 'accepted')

print(testNumber(-100))
print(testNumber(100))

otherTest(-10)
otherTest(10)
~~~
### Tasks
1. Write a function called sum100() that returns the sum of the integers from 1 to 100.
1. Write a function addExtremes() that takes three numbers as paramters and returns the sum of the smallest and the largest. Ask the users to input 3 numbers and pass them to addExtremes() as parameters. Store the return value in a new varaible and output it.
1. Write a function called average() that accepts a list integers and returns their average as a floating point value.  
*Hint: int/int -> int and float/float -> float*




## References
* [Functions](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-define-functions-in-python-3)
