# Lesson 6: PyDoc and Menu-driven apps

<!--
2.7.Interactive applications 
2.7.1. Overview of interactive applications. 
2.7.2. Building a simple interactive application.
-->

## PyDoc - Documentation generator and online help system
PyDoc automatically generates documentation (text or HTML) from Python modules using DocStrings.  
The built-in function help() invokes the online help system in the interactive interpreter, which uses pydoc to generate its documentation as text on the console. The same text documentation can also be viewed from outside the Python interpreter by running pydoc as a script at the operating system's command prompt.  

**Note**: In order to find objects and their documentation, pydoc imports the module(s) to be documented. Therefore, any code on module level will be executed on that occasion. Use an ```if __name__ == '__main__':``` guard to only execute code when a file is invoked as a script and not just imported.

### PyDoc features
When printing output to the console, pydoc attempts to paginate the output for easier reading.

Specifying a -w flag before the argument will cause HTML documentation to be written out to a file in the current directory, instead of displaying text on the console.

You can also use pydoc to start an HTTP server on the local machine that will serve documentation to visiting Web browsers. In my case,
```python C:\Users\robert\AppData\Local\Programs\Python\Python38\Lib\pydoc.py -p 1234``` will start a HTTP server on port 1234, allowing you to browse the documentation at http://localhost:1234/.

## Class practical task
Write a script that welcomes the user with the following menu:
~~~
Welcome to my menu-driven, choose one of the following:
1. BMI calculator
2. Lottery draw
3. Word counter
4. Your feature
5. Quit
~~~
*Hint: start by implementing the menu navigation first, and add features one by one.*

### Feature 1: BMI calculator
You can use the logic from the BMI calculator you developed earlier in the course, making proper use of functions. After the user finished the inputs and the result is displayed, take the user back to the main menu.


### Feature 2: Lottery draw
Lottery rules: 5 **unique** random numbers between 1 and 90. After the result is displayed, take the user back to the main menu.

### Feature 3: Word counter
Ask the user to enter a sentence and print out the following statistics:
* Number of characters
* Number of alphabetical letters (a-z, A-Z)
* Number of vowels
* Number of words

After the result is displayed, take the user back to the main menu.

### Feature 4: Your feature
Come up with a feature that you with to add to the program and implement it here. After the result is displayed, take the user back to the main menu.

### Feature 5: Quit
Exit the script if the user chooses this option.

### Other specifications
1. If the user enters invalid input anywhere, the script should handle the wrong input gracefully (use exception handling) and ask the user to enter it again.
1. Use functions as much as possible. 
1. Organise your script into separate modules, one for each feature.
1. Use proper docstrings for all your functions.
1. Generate HTML documentation using PyDoc.

## Task/Research
Get your hands dirty with [slicing for strings and lists](https://railsware.com/blog/python-for-machine-learning-indexing-and-slicing-for-lists-tuples-strings-and-other-sequential-types/)

```python
colors = ['red', 'green', 'blue', 'yellow', 'white', 'black']
#           0       1        2       3         4        5
#          -6      -5       -4      -3        -2       -1

colors[0]  -> 'red'
colors[5]  -> 'black'
colors[-1] -> 'black'
colors[-6] -> 'red'

nums = [10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90]
#        0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8
#       -9  -8  -7  -6  -5  -4  -3  -2  -1

nums[2:7]   -> [30, 40, 50, 60, 70]
nums[0:4]   -> [10, 20, 30, 40]
nums[:5]    -> [10, 20, 30, 40, 50]
nums[-3:]   -> [70, 80, 90]
nums[1:-1]  -> [20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80]
nums[-5:-1] -> [50, 60, 70, 80]
```

## References
* [pydoc](https://docs.python.org/3/library/pydoc.html)
