<!-- 
MD: https://github.com/adam-p/markdown-here/wiki/Markdown-Cheatsheet
-->
# 00.Pre-requisites
In this series of articles will go through all the steps needed to write a script that reads information from a website. Other articles in this series will cover:
* [01. Introduction to Python scraping and Selenium](01.PythonAndSelenium.md)
* [02. Writing a basic selenium script to get information](02.BasicSelenium.md)
* [03. Optimising the script for performance and stability](03.Optimisations.md)

## Basic knowledge of HTML
This article sequence assumes a basic knowledge of web page source code including:
* HTML document structure
* Attributes of common HTML elements
* Basic Javascript and AJAX
* Awareness of lazy-loading techninques

A good place to start is [W3Schools](https://www.w3schools.com/html/html_intro.asp).

## Installing Python
As part of the pre-requisites, installing the correct version of Python and pip is required. This setup section assumes a Windows operating system, but it should be easily transferable to Mac OSX or Linux.

Which Python version should one use: Python 2 or 3? This might have been a point of discussion in the past (Python 2.7 is the Latest version of Python 2.x and was released in 2010) since the two are not compatible, one had to pick a version. However today (2020) it is pretty safe to go with version 3.x, with the latest stable version at the time of writing being 3.8.

Start by downloading the latest version of Python 3 from the [official website](https://www.python.org/downloads/windows/). Install it as you would with any other software. To confirm that it was successfully installed open the Command Prompt window and type __python__, you should see something like the following:
```
C:\WINDOWS\System32>python
Python 3.8.3 (tags/v3.8.3:6f8c832, May 13 2020, 22:20:19) [MSC v.1925 32 bit (Intel)] on win32
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
>>> 
```
### Installing and using pip
pip is the package installer for Python. It is very likely that it came along with your Python installation. You can check by entering __pip -V__ in a Comand Prompt Window, and you should see something like the following:
```
C:\WINDOWS\System32>pip -V
pip 20.1.1 from c:\path\to\python\python38-32\lib\site-packages\pip (python 3.8)
```
If pip is not available, it needs to be installed by following these steps:
* Download [get-pip.py](https://bootstrap.pypa.io/get-pip.py) to a folder on your computer.
* Open a command prompt
* Navigate to the folder where get-pip.py was saved
* Run the following command: __python get-pip.py__
